If it was away, we'd try to get back before night
come. And that was on a Sunday, too, that we done
that. Now, when we were slaves, we couldn't do
that, see? And if we got free, we didn't know
nothing to do. And my mother, she hunted places and
bound us out for a dollar a month. We stayed there
maybe a couple of years. She'd come over and
collect the money every month. And the dollar was
worth more then than $10 is now.
And the men used to work for $10 a month, $120 a year,
used to hire that way. Now you can't get a man for $50
a month. If you pay a man now $50 a month, he don't
want to work for it. More like $50 a week nowadays.
Well, that's just it exactly. They want $50 a week,
and they ain't got no more now. And we had then, and
we, no more money. But, of course, they bought more
stuff and more property and all that. We didn't
have no property. We didn't have no home. We had
nowhere, nothing. We didn't have nothing. We just
grew, like your cattle, we just turned out and get
along the best you could. Nobody to look after, so
well. We've been slaves all our lives. My mother
was a slave. My sister was a slave. Father was a
slave. Who was your father a slave for? He was a
slave for Burnley. He belonged to Burnley. Didn't
he belong to Thomas Jefferson at one time? He
didn't belong to Thomas Jefferson. My
grandfather belonged to Thomas Jefferson. Oh,
your grandfather did. And my father belonged to
Burnley. Burnley died during the war time.
Because he was afraid he'd have to go to war. But
now, in them days, you could hire a substitute to
take your place. Well, he couldn't get a
substitute to take his place, so he'd run away from
home. And he took hold. And when he come back, the
war was over, but he died. And then, if he had lived,
it wouldn't have been no good. The Yankees just
come along and... and just broke the mill open and
rolled all the flour out in the river and broke the
store open and sold all the meat out in the street
and sold all the sugar out. And we'd boil it and we'd
pick it up and carry it and give it to our middle
missus and master, young master, and tell them
we'd come to be. Well, I don't know how. I don't know
how to tell you the truth. When I think of it today, I
don't know how I'm living. None of the rest of them
that I know of is living. I'm the oldest one that I
know that's living. But still, I'm thankful to the
Lord. Now, if my master wanted to send me,
he never said you couldn't get a horse and ride and
walk, give you a note. He'd be barefooted and cold.
He wasn't no more than a dog some of them in them
days. He wasn't treated as good as they treat dogs
now. But still, I didn't like to talk with him
because it makes people feel bad.
I could say a whole lot I don't like to say. I won't
say a whole lot no more. Do you remember much about
the Civil War? No, I don't remember much about it.
You were a little young then, I guess. I remember
when the Yankees come along and took all the good
horses and took all the, sold all the meat and flour
and sugar and stuff out in the river and let it go
down the river. And they know the people wouldn't
have nothing to live on, but they done that. That's
the reason why I don't like to talk about it.
People, if you was cooking anything, eating that
for yourself, And if they was hungry, they'd go and
eat it all up and get nothing. They'd just come in
and drink up all them milk. Just do as they please.
Time to be passing by all night long, walking,
mudding, raining. Oh, they had a cold time.
Colored people is free. They ought to be awful
thankful. And some of them are sorry they are free
now. Some of them never would rather be slaves.
Which would you rather be, Uncle Phil? Me? Which
I'd rather be? You know what I'd rather do? If I
thought, had any idea, that I'd ever be a slave
again, I'd take a gun and just end it all right away.
Because you're nothing but a dog. You're not a
thing but a
dog. Night never comes out. You have nothing to do.
Time to cut tobacco.
If they want you to cut all night long out in the
field, you cut.
And if they want you to hang all night long, you
hang. Hang tobacco. It didn't matter about your
ties, being tied, you're afraid to say you're
tied. They just,
well. When did you come to Baltimore? You know, you
don't remember when Garfield died, do you? When
they shot Garfield? No, I don't think he was born. I
don't think so either. I don't remember what year
that was myself now. But I knew you wasn't born.
When I come to Baltimore that year, I don't
remember what year it was now myself. But if I was
laying in the bed, I could remember. But I don't
remember now.
But did you go to work for Mr. Shirley when you came
to Baltimore? Oh, no, no. I worked for a man by the
name of Reed when I first come to Baltimore. I used
to come here to haul manure for him. All horses were
here then. No electric cars, no cable cars, all
horse cars. And I used to haul manure, go around to
different stables. Everybody had horses for
their use when I first come here. They had
coachmen. Men driving around didn't have
automobiles. They hadn't been there so long.
And then they put on a cable car, what they called
cable cars. Well, they run them for a little while,
maybe a couple of three years or four years. Then
somebody invented the electric car, and that
first one on North Avenue. Well, they had it on a
while, and they kept on inventing and inventing
until They got them all, different kinds of cars,
you
know. There was horse cars. There wasn't no
electric car at all. There wasn't no big cars like
you got now, you
know. I just can't, I just can't think of what year
it was. But,
You're
not getting tired, are you, young friend? No, no, I
ain't. I'm just sitting at home. It's like I'm
sitting in the house.
I was thinking about, oh, now you know how we served
the Lord when I was a boy? We would go to somebody's
house and, well, we didn't have no house like we've
got now, you know. We had these, what they call, log
cabins.
And they have one old, maybe one old colored man
would be there. Maybe he'd be as old as I am. And he'd
be the preacher. Not as old as I am now. He'd be the
preacher and we'd all sit down and listen to him
talk about the Lord. Well, he'd say, well, I
wonder,
sometimes he'd say, I wonder if we'll ever be free.
Well, some of them would say, well, we're going to
ask the Lord to free us. So he'd say, well, we're
going to sing. I wonder, shall I ever reach heaven?
I wonder, shall I fly? And they would sing that for
about an hour Then the next one would get up and say,
let's sing a song. We're going to live on milk and
honey. Way by and by. Oh, I can hear them singing
now, but I can't repeat like I could in them days.
But someday when I'm not hoarse, I could tell you. I
could sing it for you, but I'm too hoarse now. And
then he would sing.
I'm going to. I'm going to.
Sing around the order. Oh, I wish I could sing it for
you. I'm going to sing around the order. I wish you
could, too. Well, someday you come over here, and
I'm not host. You get me to come up here, and I'll try
to sing it for you. Okay, I'm going to do that. Now, I
heard people here now sing about a rolled shirt and
a roll. Well, that's old-time people. That's what
the old people used to sing in old back days. The
Roll Jordan Roll? Yeah, but they don't sing it like
the old people used to sing it in them days. They
sing it quite different now.
There's another one they sing
by and by when the morning comes. Well, they sing
that different, too. But they're getting the old
people's songs. I hear them come over the radio. I
know them all just as good as they, but they sing
them different. They have different names. Yes,
well, they cut them all short and all they get. If
I had my voice, I would sing this one for you so you'd
go in that room, but I can't do it on account of my
voice. But someday you come over here, you come and
call me up and let me know how my voice is. Ever since
I took that medicine from that doctor, it hurt my
voice.
Now there was a preacher in my house the other
night. He lived right next door to me and he played
it on the piano. And he played something and I sung
it for him. And now he wants me to go down to his
church next Sunday. I told him, I said, now, if I go
down to your church, I'll not sing nothing.
Because if I do, I'll get hoarse. I can't talk. But
he said, Brother Hughes, I don't care whether you
sing or not. I just want you to go down there and let
the people see who you are. Let them see who the old
people is. I said, well, I'll be glad to go down with
him. So next Sunday, I'm going down to his church.
Nothing happened. But if he sings something old,
I...
Just sing along.
I feel the spirit now, but I can't. I got to keep
quiet. Now, do you ever hear this fellow that comes
over the radio? I think they call him Holmes. Comes
over Sunday night about 12 o'clock on WFPR. No,
I've never heard him or not. Well, you turn him on.
He comes on the quarter after 11 on Sunday night.
Well, you must have heard him because he says, you
can't keep a good man down. So he makes so much
noise, it looked like everybody ought to hear him.
But now when that fellow comes around, I'm laying
in the bed. Don't you know, I get just so, I got to be
in that. Because it's all old time business. And
somebody don't like it. They says, I don't like
homes. I says, why? Oh, he says, it makes too much
noise. I said, well, the Bible said make a noise
over Jesus. Jesus said make a noise over me. So he
makes a noise over me. And I does enjoy certainly
show. Oh, he's, oh, everybody, he's got a big crowd
and we just get so happy. I got to do that too. Boy,
when you feel the grace of God, you got to jump up. I
lay in bed, I got to get up. Help carry on. Then next
morning I can't talk.
And this is part two of AFS recording number 9,990,
original LWL number 1,500, reel number three of
three.
The doctor gave me that medicine and just told me
all
this. I sure hope you come back again because I'd
like to hear you sing. The old people used to say,
wonder if I shall ever reach heaven or wonder shall
I fly. I used to go singing. Well, sometimes I feel
the spirit, you know. I might get to sing someday
again someday.
Do
you go to church every Sunday, Uncle Finn? Don't go
to church at all. I listen to the radio. Listen to it
on the radio, huh? Because I tell you why I don't go
to church.
You'd rather not have this on? You'd rather not
tell me or you'd rather not have this on when you
tell me? It don't make a difference. I ain't going
to say nothing wrong. I ain't going to say nothing
wrong. This
is the B-side of AFS recording number 9986,
original LWO number 1559, reel two of three.